Unless otherwise specified, all parameters to all initialisers are optional. Default values are shown, though it should be noted that some parameters may override others (for example, specifying `shortest` and `longest` makes the default value for `length` irrelevant).<sup>1</sup>

Some parameters, if provided, require other parameters to also be provided or an error occurs (normally in the form of an assertion). For example, if `shortest` is provided, `longest` should also be provided with a value that is equal to or larger than `shortest`.

<sup>1</sup> The current implementation actually specifies default (equal) values for `shortest` and `longest`. Specifying `length` overrides both of these defaults. The examples shown here show `length` as having a default value for brevity and ease of conceptual understanding.


# Binary-valued Individuals #

```
random_binary(length=10, shortest, longest)
binary_zero(length=10, shortest, longest)
binary_one(length=10, shortest, longest)
binary_toggle(length=10, shortest, longest)
```

The `random_binary` initialiser returns a sequence of individuals generated by a pseudo-random number generator. The generator is the same one used throughout the system (except for landscape initialisation).

The `binary_zero` and `binary_one` initialisers return sequences of individuals with all bits clear or all bits set, respectively. `binary_toggle` returns alternating individuals: the first and all subsequent odd individuals have all bits set and the remainder have all bits clear.

```
random_int_binary(length, bits_per_value=8, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)
binary_zero_int(length, bits_per_value=8, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)
binary_one_int(length, bits_per_value=8, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)

random_real_binary(length, bits_per_value=8, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, resolution, offset, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)
binary_zero_real(length, bits_per_value=8, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, resolution, offset, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)
binary_one_real(length, bits_per_value=8, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, resolution, offset, ones_complement, twos_complement, gray_code, counted, encoding)
```

`random_real_binary` and `random_int_binary` include genotype-phenotype mappings. The genotype is binary valued and identical to that returned by `random_binary`; all crossover and mutation operations are binary, for example, `mutate_bitflip` is available while `mutate_gaussian` is not.

`length` is the number of mapped values - not the number of bits (and note that it has no default value). `bits_per_value` is a list of integers specifying the number of bits for each value or a single integer to apply to all values. The total number of bits is calculated from these two parameters.

The four encoding methods available are ones-complement (unsigned integer), twos-complement (signed integer), Gray code and "counted" (sum). Specifying `True` for one of these parameters is sufficient to select that encoding type. The `encoding` parameter accepts either an integer mapping to one of the encoding methods (see the [code documentation](http://code.google.com/p/esec/source/browse/esec/esec/species/binary_real.py#299)) or a custom mapping function.

For integer mappings, the binary values map directly to integers. Ones-complement and Gray code mapping produce a range from zero to `2**bits-1`. Twos-complement mapping produces a range from `-2**(bits-1)` to `2**(bits-1)-1`. Counted produces a range from zero to `bits`. (All ranges are inclusive.)

For real mappings, the binary values are converted to their integer values as above. The integer values are then mapped to the range specified by `lowest` and `highest` (or `resolution` and `offset`). `lowest` and `highest` are inclusive.


# Integer-valued Individuals #

```
random_int(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
integer_low(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
integer_high(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
integer_toggle(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
integer_increment(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
integer_count(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0, highest=255, bounds)
```

The `random_int` initialiser returns a sequence of individuals generated by a pseudo-random number generator. The generator is the same one used throughout the system (except for landscape initialisation). Each gene has a value between `lowest` and `highest`, inclusive.

`bounds` is a tuple (ordered pair) containing the lowest and highest limits of any gene. If omitted, the values of `lowest` and `highest` are used. Settings `bounds` independently initialises individuals to a smaller (or larger) range than what later operations are allowed to produce.

The `integer_low` and `integer_high` initialisers return sequences of individuals with all values set to `lowest` or `highest`, respectively. `integer_toggle` returns alternating individuals: the first and all subsequent odd inidividuals have all values set to `highest` and the remainder have all values set to `lowest`.

`integer_increment` returns a sequence of individuals where the value of each gene increments from `lowest` to `highest` (inclusive), wrapping back to `lowest`. For example, `integer_increment(lowest=0, highest=3)` would return individuals with the genes `[0, 1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2, 3, 0, 1]`.

`integer_count` returns a sequence of individuals where the genes of each individual contain a count from `lowest` to `highest` (inclusive), wrapping back to `lowest`. For example, `integer_count(length=1, lowest=0, highest=3)` would return the individuals `[0]`, `[1]`, `[2]`, `[3]`, `[0]`, `[1]`, ...

# Real-valued Individuals #

```
random_real(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, bounds)
real_low(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, bounds)
real_high(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, bounds)
real_toggle(length=10, shortest, longest, lowest=0.0, highest=1.0, bounds)
```

The `random_real` initialiser returns a sequence of individuals generated by a pseudo-random number generator. The generator is the same one used throughout the system (except for landscape initialisation). Each gene has a value between `lowest` (inclusive) and `highest` (exclusive).

`bounds` is a tuple (ordered pair) containing the lowest and highest limits of any gene. If omitted, the values of `lowest` and `highest` are used. Settings `bounds` independently initialises individuals to a smaller (or larger) range than what later operations are allowed to produce.

The `real_low` and `real_high` initialisers return sequences of individuals with all values set to `lowest` or `highest`, respectively. `real_toggle` returns alternating individuals: the first and all subsequent odd inidividuals have all values set to `highest` and the remainder have all values set to `lowest`.

# Tree-based Genetic Programming Individuals #

```
boolean_tgp(terminals=0, deepest=10, adfs=0, terminal_prob=0.5, constants=False)
integer_tgp(terminals=0, deepest=10, adfs=0, terminal_prob=0.5, lowest_constant, highest_constant)
real_tgp(terminals=0, deepest=10, adfs=0, terminal_prob=0.5, lowest_constant, highest_constant, transcendentals=False)
```

The `terminals`, `deepest`, `adfs` and `terminal_prob` parameters are common to all TGP initialisers. `terminals` specifies the number of externally provided parameters required (this is usually specified by the evaluator, for example, a two-dimensional symbolic regression problem may need two terminals, `X` and `Y`). `deepest` is the depth limit of generated programs. `adfs` is the number of automatically-defined functions to create. `terminal_prob` is the probability of a branch terminating before reaching the depth limit.

The `boolean_tgp` initialiser returns a sequence of programs using the set of Boolean instructions, specifically, `AND`, `OR`, `NOT`, `XOR` and `IF`. If `constants` is `True`, randomly selected constants may also be included.

The `integer_tgp` initialiser returns a sequence of programs using the set of integer instructions, specifically, `+`, `-`, `*` and `/` (the division operation returns 0 for divide-by-zero operations). If provided, `lowest_constant` and `highest_constant` are the inclusive lower and upper limits on randomly generated constants.

The `real_tgp` initialiser returns a sequence of programs using the set of real-value instructions, specifically, `+`, `-`, `*` and `/` (the division operation returns 0 for divide-by-zero operations). If provided, `lowest_constant` and `highest_constant` are the lower (inclusive) and upper (exclusive) limits on randomly generated constants. If `transcendentals` is `True`, the `sin`, `cos`, `exp` and `log` instructions are also included (`exp` returns 0.0 instead of overflowing and `log` uses the absolute value of its parameter, returning 0.0 for `log(0.0)`).

# Grammatical Evolution Individuals #

```
random_ge(grammar, defines, length, shortest=1, longest=100, lowest=0, highest=255, wrap_count=0)
```

The `random_ge` initialiser returns a sequence of individuals generated by a pseudo-random number generator. The generator is the same one used throughout the system (except for landscape initialisation). Each gene has a value between `lowest` and `highest`, inclusive.

The `grammar` parameter is required and is either an instance of the `Grammar` class or a dictionary describing the grammar. (See [GEGrammar](GEGrammar.md) for the specification format for grammars.) The `defines` parameter, if provided, is a block of code (string), a dictionary or an object with a `__dict__` member (such as a module) that provides extra definitions for the generated programs.

The `length`, `shortest`, `longest`, `lowest` and `highest` parameters behave identically to those in integer-valued individuals.

The `wrap_count` parameter specifies the number of times a genome may be reused during the genotype-phenotype mapping if the end of the genome is reached before the grammar terminates. If `wrap_count` is reached before the grammar terminates the individual is said to be invalid.